---
title: Making a website with Scotty and Hakyll
author: Jacob Walters
description: An account of how I set up my static website using Hakyll and Scotty
---

I'm (currently) a Haskell nut,
and it's a rite of passage for any CS student
to have a neglected blog.
Why not kill two birds with one stone,
and write a blog using Haskell tools?

Laziness is one of Haskell's primary features,
and I've taken this to heart
in the form of minimising the effort required to do
*anything* for this site, once everything is set up.
What this means is that my site has the following goals:

- Blog posts should be written in markdown
or some other easily editable format.

- Pushing content to the blog should be pretty painless,
ideally with one command.

- All administrative actions
(updating SSL certificates,
starting the webserver on my VPS's startup,
etc.)
should be performed automatically wherever possible.

And, last but certainly not least,

- The code behind the site should be 100% Haskell.

## Frontend
So, let's entertain for a second the wild idea that
I have something of significance to say.
I want to be able to write this down
in Markdown[^md] and have it converted to HTML automatically.
such that it may be rendered by a browser.

[^md]: Because I'm lazy, and
Markdown is very close to being pure plaintext.
It's also compatible with practically every blog platform,
should I choose to switch at some point.

Thankfully for me,
most of the work has been done for me!
Enter [Hakyll](https://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/),
a static site generator written and configured in Haskell.
It basically takes a list of posts,
and some HTML template files,
mashes them together and works out the hyperlinks,
and spits out a fully organised directory structure of HTML files
that can be copied straight over into your webserver.

The input files are converted using [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org),
so nearly any input source can be used.
This is nice, as it means that I can also use LaTeX
if I have a particularly mathsy topic.

### Sidenotes

As far as CSS goes, I liked the idea of using sidenotes,[^sidenote]
as they're a great way of adding extra information
without breaking the flow of the main body.

[^sidenote]: Like these!

I've been a fan of [Gwern's site](https://gwern.net)
for a good few years,
and while the sidenotes there
(which can be on either side of the text)
are something I'd really like to have,
they require javascript, which I'd rather avoid.

So, I instead opted to use
[tufte-css](https://edwardtufte.github.io/tufte-css/),
which gets me most of the way there with pure CSS.
I've made some slight modifications
(namely removing the custom fonts
and relying on the browser's defaults,
which is better for accessibility
and load times),
but it's mostly the same.

To properly integrate this with Hakyll,
I use [pandoc-sidenote](http://hackage-origin.haskell.org/package/pandoc-sidenote),
which allows me to use
normal Markdown footnote syntax
and have it rendered as sidenotes.

### Accessibility
The accessibility of my site is something that
I've put a fair amount of thought into.
I ensure that no part of my site uses JavaScript,[^js]
which makes the site compatible with
nearly every browser
since the inception of the web.

[^js]: In the future,
I may make some small JS
(or more likely Type/PureScript)
experiments.
These will live under their own directory,
and it will be made obvious that
JS is required for such pages.

Unfortunately,
tufte-css doesn't render very cleanly
when CSS is disabled;
the text is inserted at the point of reference,
which tends to break the sentence order.
This is a compromise that I had to make
so as to avoid using JavaScript.
I reason that since the Markdown source
of all of my posts
is available on GitHub,
this isn't *that* big of a problem.

Alongside being more widely accessible,
there are other benefits to running
such a minimalist site:
pages can be served nearly *instantly*.
(Rudimentary) testing suggests that
page requests are fully processed
in 100 microseconds on average,
meaning that the vast majority
of waiting time
is simply in network delay
and browser rendering.
I haven't even implemented page caching yet!

### Source
The source for my site
is available on
[my GitHub](https://github.com/9nine9nine9/site-frontend).


## Backend
So we have our static files
that we want to serve to the user.
We could be boring and
chuck them into apache or nginx
and call it a day.
*Or*, we could write our own
webserver in Haskell.

***Or****, we could steal someone else's*!
[Scotty](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/scotty)
will do the job nicely.
The gist is that
we receive an HTTP request
to our webserver,
figure out what it's asking for,
and then reply with what it wants.

In our case, this basically means
we just figure out which file it's asking for.
This is *slightly* more complicated than
just copying the file path,
since we want to e.g.
redirect /posts to /archive.html.

Scotty effectively 


### TLS


## Other shenanigans
### Server
A site's gotta have a server to run on,
otherwise you wouldn't be able to access it!
I'm (at the time of writing) renting a VPS from
[Contabo](https://contabo.com),
who for 5 EUR/month will give you
8 GB of RAM, 4 CPU cores and 200 GB of SSD storage.

This is clearly overkill for a mere website,
but it gives me the freedom to
run lots of other services also,
including a Discord bot for our year at uni,
game servers, etc.

Point is, I'm getting my money's worth.

### Domain
Any site worth its salt must have a good domain name.
I'm lucky in that my name:
1. forms a valid URL if you put a dot in it,
2. forms a URL that isn't already taken, and
3. forms a relatively cheap URL.[^ICANN]

[^ICANN]: This last point is pretty huge;
the equivalent domain for one of my friends
would have cost him over £3,000 a year!

I rent my domain from [Njalla](https://njal.la),
for 30 euros per year.
Not a bad price at all, if you ask me.
I have full control over the DNS,
and the whois details opint to njalla, not me.[^whois]

[^whois]: Not that this matters all too much,
given that the domain is my legal name anyways.

### Email
One of the biggest advantages of having a vanity domain like mine
is making vanity email addresses.
Unfortunately, almost all email providers require monthly fees
if you want to use your own domain.
And since I'm a fan of not
being blacklisted from every major email service,
self-hosting my email isn't an option either.

So, I settled for
[mailbox](https://mailbox.org),
who provide custom domain support for only three euros a month.
This price also nets you a lot of other things,
so in my eyes it's not a bad investment.

